---
title: Nix Rocks
description: Imagine you have to start working on a new code base. What do you want to do in order to configure your development environment? My ideal workflow involves three steps...
---

# Why Nix is my Favorite Package Manager

Imagine you have to start working on a new code base. What do you want to do in order to configure your development environment? My ideal workflow involves three steps:

1. I clone the repository onto my machine and `cd` into it.

2. I run one command in my shell, `install-dependencies`, which downloads absolutely everything I need to work with the project.

3. I start programming.

Note that this process is language agnostic. If I need to use a particular version of GCC, running `install-dependencies` should give it to me; if I need to install 3242 packages from NPM and three different databases including Postgres, running `install-dependencies` should download those for me. I shouldn't have to know or care about the intricacies of Cargo, Quicklisp, CMake, RubyGems, pipenv, apt, xbps, pacman, brew, raco, Opam, and 50 other different tools that all basically do the same thing. I just want to run `install-dependencies` and have everything work.

I also want all of the depependencies to be _project specific._ If I need to use two different versions of LLVM in two separate places, that should work out of the box with no special effort on my part.

Is this workflow possible? Believe it or not, the answer is _yes._ Enter the [Nix package manager](https://nixos.org/).

To make this workflow work with Nix, you need to:

1. Write a `shell.nix` file in the root of your project that pulls down all of the dependencies that you need.

2. Run `nix-shell` to put all of them on your path. `nix-shell` does everything I described the imaginary `install-dependencies` command doing.

Nix also solves the problem of reliable and reproducible builds. If you write a `default.nix` file and put it in your project's root, contributors can just run `nix-build` and go on their merry way without fiddling with `$BUILD_TOOL`.

Does Nix come with drawbacks? Yes—the learning curve and the documentation. Working with Nix requires learning a specialized functional programming language and half-a-dozen separate command line tools. To figure out how everything works together, you'll probably wind up scouring Google and reading the package manager's source code more often than you'd like. Nix is also extremely disk hungry because of all the dependencies it manages for you. With that said, once you learn how to work with Nix effectively, package management becomes much, much easier.

PS: You can automate away the need to run `nix-shell` every time you enter a new project by installing [direnv](https://direnv.net/) and [nix-direnv](https://github.com/nix-community/nix-direnv) onto your machine. All you have to is create an `.envrc` file with the line `use-nix` at the top in the root of your project's repository; then, when you `cd` into it, all of the dependencies will get placed onto your path automagically.
